Introduction

The How Websites Work room on TryHackMe is a foundational lab designed to teach beginners how websites function behind the scenes. It covers essential concepts such as DNS, HTTP/HTTPS, web servers, and how browsers interact with websites.

Understanding these basics is critical for anyone starting in cybersecurity or web development.
Objective

The goal of this room is to understand:

How a website loads in a browser

The role of DNS in resolving domain names

How HTTP/HTTPS communication works

The basics of web servers and hosting
Task 1: What is a Website?

A website is a collection of web pages hosted on a server and accessible through the internet using a domain name.

Key Concept

When a user enters a URL in a browser, several processes happen in the background to display the webpage.
Task 2: Domain Name System (DNS)

What is DNS?

The Domain Name System (DNS) translates human-readable domain names into IP addresses.

For example:
example.com → 93.184.216.34

How It Works

User enters a domain name in the browser

The system queries DNS servers

The IP address of the server is returned

The browser connects to that server

Key Learning

DNS acts like the “phonebook of the internet.”
Task 3: HTTP and HTTPS
HTTP (HyperText Transfer Protocol)

HTTP is the protocol used for communication between a browser and a web server.

HTTPS (Secure HTTP)

HTTPS is the secure version of HTTP that uses encryption.

Key Differences

HTTP → Not secure

HTTPS → Encrypted using SSL/TLS

Example Request
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1
Host: example.com
Key Learning

HTTPS ensures confidentiality and data integrity.
Task 4: Web Servers

A web server is responsible for storing and delivering website content.

Common Web Servers
Become a Medium member

Apache

Nginx

How It Works

Browser sends a request

Server processes the request

Server sends a response (HTML, CSS, JS)

Key Learning

Web servers handle incoming requests and return web pages.
Task 5: HTML Basics

What is HTML?

HTML (HyperText Markup Language) is used to structure web pages.

Example
<html>
<head>
<title>My Website</title>
</head>
<body>
<h1>Hello World</h1>
</body>
</html>
Key Learning

HTML defines the structure and content of a webpage.
Task 6: How a Website Loads

Step-by-Step Process

User enters a URL in the browser

DNS resolves the domain to an IP address

Browser sends an HTTP/HTTPS request

Server responds with webpage data

Browser renders the page

Key Learning

Multiple systems work together to load a webpage in seconds.
Task 7: Cookies and Sessions

Cookies

Small pieces of data stored in the browser.

Sessions

Used to maintain user state (like login sessions).

Key Learning

Cookies and sessions help websites remember users.
Task 8: Final Thoughts

This room focuses on understanding the core building blocks of the web rather than exploitation.

Key Takeaways

DNS translates domain names into IP addresses

HTTP/HTTPS enables communication between client and server

Web servers host and deliver content

HTML structures web pages

Cookies and sessions maintain user data
Conclusion

The How Websites Work room is essential for beginners in cybersecurity. Before learning hacking techniques, it is important to understand how systems function normally.

This lab builds a strong foundation that helps in understanding web vulnerabilities in later stages.
